Document vector indexes (#690)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/indexes-for-nearest-neighbor.adoc

====

All vectors within the index must have the same dimensionality.
The measure of similarity is determined by the given vector similarity function; it defines how similar two vectors are from one another by a similarity score, how vectors are interpreted, and what vectors are valid for the index.

A node is indexed if:

* the node contains the configured label,
* the node contains the configured property key,
* the respective property value is of type `LIST<FLOAT>`,
* the xref:functions/scalar.adoc#functions-size[`size()`] of the respective value is the same as the configured dimensionality,
* and the value is a valid vector for the configured similarity function.

Otherwise, a node is not indexed.

.Create vector index
====

For instance, assume we have a graph of research papers, and each paper has an abstract; we wish to find papers in the neighborhood of a paper we know.

.Data model
[source,cypher]
----
(:Title)<--(:Paper)-->(:Abstract)
----

Assume for each abstract, we have generated a 1536-dimensional vector `embedding` of the abstract's `text` using Open AI's default model, `text-embedding-ada-002`.

> This model suggestions a xref:indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[cosine similarity].

Reviewer: suggests :)

We can create a cosine vector index over the `embedding` property.

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
CALL db.index.vector.createNodeIndex('abstract-embeddings', 'Abstract', 'embedding', 1536, 'cosine')
----

.Result
[queryResult]
----
(no changes, no records)
----

We can see that the vector index has been created using `SHOW INDEXES`

.Query
[source,cypher]
----

> SHOW INDEXES YIELD name, state, type, labelsOrTypes, properties, OPTIONS

Reviewer: Shoulds options be lowercase here (it's not a keyword in this context)?

Author: I don't know why, byt it kept making it `OPTIONS`, I swear I changed that!!

Author: IntelliJ autoformat, must have tied into the cypher inline syntax and tried to help out :roll_eyes:

Finally, a `LIST<FLOAT>` query vector in which to search for the neighborhood.

.Syntax for querying vector indexes
[source,cypher]
----
CALL db.index.vector.queryNodes('index_name', numberOfNearestNeighbours, query)
----

The procedure returns the neighborhood of nodes with their respective similarity scores, ordered by those scores.
The scores are bounded between `0` and `1`; where the closer to `1`, the more similar to the query vector.

.Query vector index
====
For instance, let's take the paper that describes the HNSW{fn-hnsw} graph structure that the vector index implements, and try and find similar papers.
First we `MATCH` to find the paper, we then query the `abstract-embeddings` index for a neighborhood of `10` similar abstracts to our query.
Finally, we `MATCH` for the neighborhood's respective titles.

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (title:Title)<--(:Paper)-->(abstract:Abstract)
WHERE toLower(title.text) = 'efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using
  hierarchical navigable small world graphs'

CALL db.index.vector.queryNodes('abstract-embeddings', 10, abstract.embedding)

> YIELD NODE AS similarAbstract, score

Reviewer: Lowercase `node`?

Author: likewise here … what the heck!

| 0.9314759373664856

| "Towards Similarity Graphs Constructed by Deep Reinforcement Learning"
| 0.9301378726959229

| "A novel approach to study realistic navigations on networks"
| 0.928106427192688

| "Intentional Walks on Scale Free Small Worlds"
| 0.9274556636810303

| "FINGER: Fast Inference for Graph-based Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search"
| 0.9267876148223877

| "Learning to Route in Similarity Graphs"
| 0.9263730049133301

2+d| Rows: 10

|===

The results are quite expected, with papers discussing graph-based nearest neighbor searches.

The most similar of the result was the query vector itself, which is to be expected as we queried the index with an indexed property.
If the query vector itself is not wanted, we can use `WHERE score < 1` to remove equivalent vectors to the query vector.

====

[[indexes-vector-drop]]
== Drop vector indexes

A vector index is dropped by using the xref:indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#indexes-drop-an-index[same command as for other indexes], `DROP INDEX`.

.+DROP INDEX+
======

In the following example, we will drop the `abstract-embeddings` that we created previously:

.Query
[source,cypher]
----

> DROP INDEX abstract-embeddings

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure this would need backticks due to the dash, so maybe an unfortunate example name :P

Euclidean interprets the vectors in Cartesian coordinates.
The measure is related to the Euclidean distance, how far two points are from one another; however, that is unbounded, and less useful as a similarity score.
Euclidean similarity bounds the square of Euclidean distance.

[latexmath]
++++
\mathrm{Euclidean}(\vec v,\vec u)
    := \dfrac1{1 + \left\lVert\vec v - \vec u\right\rVert^2}
    \qquad\in\left(0,1\right]
++++

[[indexes-vector-similarity-cosine]]
=== Cosine similarity

Cosine should be used when the _angle_ between the vectors is what determines how similar two vectors are.

A valid vector for a Cosine vector index is when:

* all vector components can be represented finitely in {ieee-754} single precision,
* and its latexmath:[\ell^2]-norm is non-zero and can be represented finitely in {ieee-754} single precision.

Cosine interprets the vectors in Cartesian coordinates.
The measure is related to the angle between the two vectors; however, an angle can be described in many units, sign conventions, and periods.
The trigonometric cosine of this angle is both agnostic to the aforementioned and bounded.

> Cosine similar rebounds the trigonometric cosine.

Reviewer: Similarity?

[latexmath]
++++
\begin{align}
    \mathrm{cosine}(\vec v,\vec u)

>         &:= \tfrac12\left(1 + \hat v\cdot\hat u\right) \\[1ex]

Reviewer: Again I think it would be nice to clarify the unit vector notation

:description: This chapter describes how to use vector indexes to perform approximate nearest neighbor search.

:fn-hnsw: footnote:hnsw[See: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473[Efficient and Robust Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search Using Hierarchical Navigable Small World Graphs] -- Yury A. Malkov and Dmitry A. Yashunin (preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320:[arXiv:1603.09320])]
:fn-ieee-754: footnote:ieee-754[https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.8766229[IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic]]

:link-operations-manual: link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}
:link-procedures-reference: {link-operations-manual}/reference/procedures/

:ieee-754: IEEE 754{fn-ieee-754}

:l2-norm: image:l2.svg["l2"]-norm

[[indexes-vector]]

> = Nearest neighbor search

Reviewer 2: Could we call the chapter Vector indexes instead?

Author: We could; I was just following from the full text index page, which was named for the query it enables, not the index type … though they are effectively the same, they are semantically different
full text index --> full text search
vector index --> (approximate) nearest neighbor search

[abstract]
--
This chapter describes how to use vector indexes to perform an approximate nearest neighbor search.
--

> _This feature is introduced in Neo4j 5.11._ label:beta[]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.11._ label:beta[]

This chapter describes how to use vector indexes to perform an approximate nearest neighbor search.
```

> Vector indexes are powered by the link:https://lucene.apache.org/[Apache Lucene] indexing and search library, and can be used to index nodes by `LIST<FLOAT>` properties valid to the index.

Reviewer 2: I know the full-text index page currently starts like this (I have not yet had the time to fix it), but I think it is not the most helpful way to start. Maybe moving forward, we could add an introduction section (including answers to questions such as "what are vector indexes?", "why would you use them?") to start the page with, to ease the learning curve for those not already initiated.

Author: Yeah I tooks some inspiration from full text as they're somewhat similar in their own ways being somewhat separate from the other indexes.

Sure, absolutely; as we've discussed in the past for a index/constraints rewrite, most of the actual _details_ of the indexes will likely be moved to operations manual. But those discussions are likely to be on a more general "index" page, rather than a specific index page … though I guess "why would you use _this_ index" might be relevant to bring forward.

Do we want to have such a section in this first iteration? Provide it later? Or when we eventually find time to work on the index/constraint rewrite?

I say this, as 5.11 went live on Aura _this morning_

A vector index allows you to write queries that match a _neighborhood_ of nodes based on the similarity of those node properties to the query.
Lucene implements a Hierarchical Navigable Small World{fn-hnsw} (HNSW) Graph to perform a _k_ approximate nearest neighbors (_k_-ANN) query over the vector fields.

> A common semantic of a vector is as an embedding, a numerical representation of a resource, for example, text, images, audio, or documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A common semantic of a vector is as an embedding.
This is a numerical representation of a resource such as a text, image, audio, or document.
```

> Embedding generators such as https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai[Vertex AI] or https://openai.com/[OpenAI] can produce 768, 1024, 1536, etc., dimensional vector embeddings.

Reviewer 2: This is probably due to my ignorance, but do we need to elaborate on these numbers at all?

Author: Examples of common embedding, and thus vector sizes.
Just an implicit note that suggests to a less knowledgable user what "number" to use from the several that might be thrown at them from certain generators or their documentation.

It also implies a scale difference. It's highly likely we're not working with 2 or 3 dimensional vectors (like `POINT`), but hundreds/thousands of dimensions. A very different beast.

| Drop vector index.
| `+DROP INDEX index_name+`
| Drop the specified index.

| Listing all vector indexes.
| `SHOW INDEXES WHERE type = "VECTOR"`
| Lists all vector indexes, see the xref:indexes-for-search-performance.adoc#indexes-list-indexes[`SHOW INDEXES`] command for details. There is no vector index filter built into `SHOW INDEXES`.

| Set vector property.
| {link-procedures-reference}#procedure_db_create_setVectorProperty[`db.create.setVectorProperty`]
| Update a given node property with the given vector in a more space-efficient way than directly using xref:clauses/set.adoc#set-set-a-property[`SET`].

|===

[[indexes-vector-create]]
== Create and configure vector indexes

You can create vector indexes using the procedure {link-procedures-reference}#procedure_db_index_vector_createNodeIndex[`db.index.vector.createNodeIndex`].
The name of the index must be unique so that you can reference it when xref:#indexes-vector-query[querying] or if you want to xref:indexes-vector-drop[drop] the index.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The index name must be unique among both indexes and constraints.
====

> A vector index is a single-label, single-property index for nodes.
> In addition to the label and property key, both given as `STRING`, a vector index needs to be configured with both the dimensionality of the vector, `INTEGER`, and the measure of similarity between two vectors, case-insensitive `STRING` For details, see xref:#indexes-vector-similarity[].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A vector index is a single-label, single-property index for nodes.
In addition to the label and property key (both given as `STRING`), a vector index needs to be configured with both the dimensionality of the vector (`INTEGER`), and the measure of similarity between two vectors (case-insensitive `STRING`).
For details, see xref:#indexes-vector-similarity[].
```

* The value is a valid vector for the configured similarity function.

Otherwise, a node is not indexed.

.Create a vector index
====

For instance, assume you have a graph of research papers, and each paper has an abstract.
You want to find papers in the neighborhood of a paper you know.

.Data model
[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
(:Title)<--(:Paper)-->(:Abstract)
----

Assume for each abstract, you have generated a 1536-dimensional vector `embedding` of the abstract's `text` using Open AI's default model, `text-embedding-ada-002`.
This model suggests a xref:indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[cosine similarity].

You can create a cosine vector index over the `embedding` property.

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
CALL db.index.vector.createNodeIndex('abstract-embeddings', 'Abstract', 'embedding', 1536, 'cosine')
----

.Result
[queryResult]
----
(no changes, no records)
----

You can see that the vector index has been created using `SHOW INDEXES`

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
SHOW INDEXES YIELD name, state, type, labelsOrTypes, properties, options
WHERE type = "VECTOR"
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3m,2m,3m,3m,6a"]
|===

> | name | type | labelsOrTypes | properties | options

Reviewer 3: The `state` column is missing from the result, which causes a failing test.

Author: AH, sorry, that's my copy/paste issue
I originally had many more columns, but they weren't nicely rendering, so I reduced them :)

| "abstract-embeddings" | "VECTOR" | ["Abstract"]  | ["embedding"]
|
----
{
  "indexProvider": "vector-1.0",
  "indexConfig": {
"vector.dimensions": 1536,
"vector.similarity_function": "cosine"
  }
}
----

5+d|Rows: 1

|===

====

[[indexes-vector-query]]
== Query a vector index

You can query a vector index using the procedure {link-procedures-reference}#procedure_db_index_vector_queryNodes[`db.index.vector.queryNodes`].

.Signature for `db.index.vector.queryNodes` to query a vector index
[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
db.index.vector.queryNodes(indexName :: STRING?, numberOfNearestNeighbours :: INTEGER?, query :: LIST? OF FLOAT?) :: (node :: NODE?, score :: FLOAT?)
----

* The `indexName` (a string) refers to the unique name of the vector index to query.

> * The `numberOfNearestNeighbours` (an integer) refers to the number of nearest neighbors to return as the neighborhood.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `numberOfNearestNeighbours` (an `INTEGER`) refers to the number of nearest neighbors to return as the neighborhood.
```

* `LIST<FLOAT>` query vector in which to search for the neighborhood.

The procedure returns the neighborhood of nodes with their respective similarity scores, ordered by those scores.

> The scores are bounded between `0` and `1`, where the closer to `1`, the more similar to the query vector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scores are bounded between `0` and `1`, where the closer to `1` the score is, the more similar to the query vector the neighborhood of nodes is.
```

Author: the score is individual to the indexed vector compared to the query vector
So it doesn't make sense to say "neighborhood" in this case, as that implies to me the score is over the whole neighborhood.

That would be a different kind of query, if I were to ask for all vectors that are within a score of 0.9 to 1.
Which is unsupported.

However I agree this could do with a similar reword.
How about:

```suggestion
The scores are bounded between `0` and `1`, where the closer to `1` the score is, the more similar the indexed vector is to the query vector.
```

> .Query vector index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Query a vector index
```

====

> For instance, let's take the paper that describes the HNSW{fn-hnsw} graph structure that the vector index implements, and try and find similar papers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example takes the paper that describes the HNSW{fn-hnsw} graph structure that the vector index implements and tries to find similar papers.
```

> First you `MATCH` to find the paper, you then query the `abstract-embeddings` index for a neighborhood of `10` similar abstracts to your query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First you `MATCH` to find the paper, and then you query the `abstract-embeddings` index for a neighborhood of `10` similar abstracts to your query.
```

YIELD node AS similarAbstract, score

MATCH (similarAbstract)<--(:Paper)-->(similarTitle:Title)
RETURN similarTitle.text AS title, score
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="5m,2m"]
|===

| title | score

| "Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using Hierarchical Navigable Small World graphs"
| 1.0

| "Accelerating Large-Scale Graph-based Nearest Neighbor Search on a Computational Storage Platform"
| 0.9437285661697388

| "Nearest Neighbor Search Under Uncertainty"
| 0.9322342872619629

| "Neighbor selection and hitting probability in small-world graphs"
| 0.9316230416297913

| "Fast Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search With The Navigating Spreading-out Graph"
| 0.9314759373664856

| "Towards Similarity Graphs Constructed by Deep Reinforcement Learning"
| 0.9301378726959229

| "A novel approach to study realistic navigations on networks"
| 0.928106427192688

| "Intentional Walks on Scale Free Small Worlds"
| 0.9274556636810303

| "FINGER: Fast Inference for Graph-based Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search"
| 0.9267876148223877

| "Learning to Route in Similarity Graphs"
| 0.9263730049133301

2+d| Rows: 10

|===

> The results are quite expected, with papers discussing graph-based nearest-neighbor searches.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The results are expected, with papers discussing graph-based nearest-neighbor searches.
```

> The most similar to this result is the query vector itself, which is to be expected as you queried the index with an indexed property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most similar to this result is the query vector itself, which is to be expected as the index was queried with an indexed property.
```

.Query
[source,cypher]
----
DROP INDEX `abstract-embeddings`
----

.Result
[queryresult]
----
Removed 1 index.
----

======

[[indexes-vector-set]]
== Set vector property on a node

You can set a vector property, `LIST<FLOAT>`, on a node using the xref:clauses/set.adoc#set-set-a-property[`SET`] command:

.Syntax for setting a vector property
[source,cypher]
----
SET node.propertyKey = vector
----

However, Cypher stores the provided `LIST<FLOAT>` as a primitive array of {ieee-754} _double_ precision values.
Valid vectors for use in the index must have components finitely representable in {ieee-754} _single_ precision.
As a result, it takes up approximately twice as much space.

The {link-procedures-reference}#procedure_db_create_setVectorProperty[`db.create.setVectorProperty`] procedure is provided to validate and set the property as an array of {ieee-754} single precision values.
As a result, the store's space is approximately halved.

.Signature for `db.create.setVectorProperty` to set a vector property
[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
db.create.setVectorProperty(node :: NODE?, key :: STRING?, vector :: LIST? OF FLOAT?) :: (node :: NODE?)
----

> Thus, the equivalent syntax for setting as the aforementioned:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, this is the equivalent syntax for setting a vector with a procedure:
```

.Syntax for setting a vector _via_ a procedure
[source,cypher]
----
CALL db.create.setVectorProperty(node, 'propertyKey', vector)
----

This is ideal for creating and setting new vector properties in the graph.
Though existing properties can be re-set using this procedure to minimize store size, there is a cost in transaction log size until they are rotated away, especially in the case of record formats.

[[indexes-vector-similarity]]
== Supported similarity functions

> The choice of similarity function can vastly differ in which vectors are considered similar, and which are valid.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The choice of similarity function can differ vastly depending on which vectors are considered similar, and which are valid.
```

Author: Ah, I see if the confusion in what I had originally written; the relationship should be reversed.

The vectors that are considered valid for indexing and querying with, and more importantly, the indexed vectors that are considered similar to a query vector, can differ vastly depending on the choice of similarity function.

@JPryce-Aklundh what would be your suggestion to reword the lines to better encode _that_?

The semantic meaning of the vector may itself dictate which similarity function to choose.

> Consult the documentation for the particular model used to generate vector embeddings.
> The documentation may suggest a preference for certain similarity functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consult the documentation for the particular model used to generate vector embeddings, as this may suggest a preference for certain similarity functions.
```

Reviewer 4: Hey @parnmatt , which documentation do you refer to? Could you provide us with a link?

Author: Sure, will try to find the link

> Otherwise, understanding the differences can help make an informed choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise, understanding the differences between different similarity functions can help make a more informed choice.
```

.Similarity functions
[%header,cols="d,m,e"]
|===
| Name | Case Insensitive Argument | Key similarity feature

| xref:#indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean[Euclidean]
| "euclidean"
| distance

| xref:indexes-vector-similarity-cosine[Cosine]
| "cosine"
| angle

|===

> For {l2-norm}alized vectors, such that their length, image:l2norm_is_1.svg["The l2-norm of vector v equals 1"], both Euclidean and cosine similarity functions produce the same similarity ordering.

Reviewer 2: Is this still accurate?
```suggestion
For {l2-norm}alized vectors, where the length is image:l2norm_is_1.svg["The l2-norm of vector v equals 1"], both Euclidean and cosine similarity functions produce the same similarity ordering.
```

Author: I am not sure about the use of "where" here. It _can_ make sense, but could also be read to indicate that there could be l2-normalised vectors where the length is not 1 … which is impossible.

What are your thoughts about:
```suggestion
For {l2-norm}alized vectors (unit vectors), thus their length image:l2norm_is_1.svg["The l2-norm of vector v equals 1"], both Euclidean and cosine similarity functions produce the same similarity ordering.
```

[[indexes-vector-similarity-euclidean]]
=== Euclidean similarity

> Euclidean is useful when the _distance_ between the vectors is what determines how similar two vectors are.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Euclidean similarity is useful when the _distance_ between the vectors is what determines how similar two vectors are.
```

[[indexes-vector-similarity-cosine]]
=== Cosine similarity

Cosine should be used when the _angle_ between the vectors is what determines how similar two vectors are.

A valid vector for a Cosine vector index is when:

* All vector components can be represented finitely in {ieee-754} single precision.
* And its {l2-norm} is non-zero and can be represented finitely in {ieee-754} single precision.

Cosine interprets the vectors in Cartesian coordinates.
The measure is related to the angle between the two vectors.
However, an angle can be described in many units, sign conventions, and periods.
The trigonometric cosine of this angle is both agnostic to the aforementioned and bounded.
Cosine similarity rebounds the trigonometric cosine.

image::cosine_similarity_equation.svg["The cosine of vector v and vector u is defined as half of the quanity 1 plus the scalar product of v hat u hat, which equals half of the quantity 1 plus the scalar product of vector v vector u over the product of the l2-norm of vector v and the l2 norm ov vector u, which exists in the bounded set of real numbers between 0 inclusive and 1 inclusive."]

> Where the trigonometric cosine is given by the scalar product of two unit vectors.

Reviewer 2: What is this "Where" referring to? Could it be replaced with something like: "The trigonometric cosine in the above equation..."?

```suggestion
Where the trigonometric cosine is given by the scalar product of two unit vectors.
```

Author: _where_ is often used in academic writing following an equation specifically to clarify parts of it; often in lowercase as it's considered a continuation of the equation's sentence.

There is no standard function notation for the angle between two vectors in terms of those two vectors; thus cannot write something like `cos(angleBetween(v,u))`, and have to write `v.u` which is more common.

Sure, I wouldn't be opposed to something like
```suggestion
The trigonometric in the above equation is given by the scalar product of the two unit vectors.
```
Or, more preferably,
```suggestion
where scalar product of the two unit vectors is the trigonometric cosine of the angle between the two vectors.
```
or some hybrid. What are your thoughts and suggestions? Whichever we go with, I will make the same change in the operations manual which also has these.

[[indexes-vector-limitations]]

> == Known limitations and quirks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Limitations and idiosyncrasies
```
This could maybe just be "Limitations"?

| Set vector property.
| {link-procedures-reference}#procedure_db_create_setVectorProperty[`db.create.setVectorProperty`]
| Update a given node property with the given vector in a more space-efficient way than directly using xref:clauses/set.adoc#set-set-a-property[`SET`].

|===

[[indexes-vector-create]]
== Create and configure vector indexes

You can create vector indexes using the procedure {link-procedures-reference}#procedure_db_index_vector_createNodeIndex[`db.index.vector.createNodeIndex`].
The name of the index must be unique so that you can reference it when xref:#indexes-vector-query[querying] or if you want to xref:indexes-vector-drop[drop] the index.

[IMPORTANT]
====
The index name must be unique among both indexes and constraints.
====

A vector index is a single-label, single-property index for nodes.
In addition to the label and property key, both given as `STRING`, a vector index needs to be configured with both the dimensionality of the vector, `INTEGER`, and the measure of similarity between two vectors, case-insensitive `STRING` For details, see xref:#indexes-vector-similarity[].

.Syntax for creating vector indexes
[source,cypher]
----

> CALL db.index.vector.createNodeIndex('index_name', 'LabelName', 'propertyKey', dimensionality, 'similarity_function')

Reviewer 4: The test for this code is failing because it thinks `dimensionality` is a variable.

Author: … ok, how interesting … does the test try and execute cypher?
eitherway I changed this to just be the signature, as was done by you later on.

Reviewer 3: @parnmatt yes, see here https://github.com/neo4j/docs-testing/tree/main/test-cypher
TL;DR: don't mix `[source, cypher]` with `[source, syntax]`, as all cypher blocks get executed for testing.
